---
title: Why Protecting the Enviroment is Good Capitalism
categories:
- Blog
excerpt: |
  Now, Donald Trump is heading back to the white house and has suggested withdrawing from the Paris accord (again) and repealing the IRA. If his cabinet picks indicate anything, it’s that his first term is going to look like child’s play in comparison to what’s coming. Americans are fighting when they’re running out of time, like two frogs brought to slow boil while wrestling over mating rights. Why are so many smart elected officials ignoring the advice of experts? Is there a strong enough reason for not decarbonizing?

bibliography: /assets/refs/EnviromentalCapitalist.bib
---

Coal, oil, and gas (also known as fossil fuels) are burned to generate energy around the world to keep our civilization going. They have greatly decreased poverty, promoted economic growth, and fueled scientific advancement. However as a side effect they produce air pollution, mostly a gas called carbon dioxide. This gas is dumped into the air where it poisons human lungs before rising up into the atmosphere. Once freed from the ground, carbon dioxide absorbs far more heat than regular air and so it causes the planet to warm up, like greenhouse around the Earth. If there's too little greenhouse gas the Earth becomes an ice ball, if there are too much greenhouse gas the Earth heats up. This warming leads to a number of unhappy side effects: The polar ice melts and causes sea levels to rise possibly flooding coastal cities, hurricanes become stronger like a steam engine being given more fuel, wildfires burn hotter, droughts become deadlier. Already the planet's temperature has risen by more than one degree which has already increased the number and severity of natural disasters. If the temperature rises by more than two degrees vast swathes of the planet my become uninhabitable. A rise of four degrees would end civilization. To prevent ether of these outcomes we need to reduce emissions to net-zero as quickly as possible, therefore, it doesn’t seem too sound to "Drill baby drill".[@DrillBaby]

### The American Legislative war

In America, the two parties are fiercely divided on the issue of the climate, most Republicans reject (or at least pretend to reject) the evidence that the climate crisis us an existential threat while Democrats attempt to address the issue with regulations and green incentives. The two-party system has created a strained tug of war with Democrats attempting to sign in green laws and Republicans repealing, striking down, and even suing in retaliation. This makes one wonder, why is this a partisan issue in America? In most countries all the major parties agree (or at least pretend to agree) on the severity of the climate crisis. The Republicans are the only major party that is in denial despite the overwhelming evidence, it's like a jury declaring not guilty despite the eye witnesses, fingerprints, DNA, and signed confession. During his first term President Trump removed 175 environmental regulations, sued to remove Obama’s clean power plan, withdrew from the Paris climate accord, and appointed a former CEO of Exxon Mobil to his cabinet. He even ordered the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to remove the climate change section of their website, sinking all their climate research with it. After President Trump’s loss in 2020, Joe Biden reversed most these policies and rejoined the Paris accord on his first day in office. To comply with the agreement, he pushed for ambitious climate legislation and instituted several executive orders to curb emissions. In spite of a conservative supreme court and a lack of cooperation from the senate, President Biden eventually passed the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) which provides tax credits for green technology and, despite being compromised, was the most ambitious climate legislation ever to survive congress and is expected to reduce emissions 40\% by 2030. Now, Donald Trump is heading back to the white house and has suggested withdrawing from the Paris accord (again) and repealing the IRA. If his cabinet picks indicate anything, it’s that his first term is going to look like child’s play in comparison to what’s coming. Americans are fighting when they’re running out of time, like two frogs brought to slow boil while wrestling over mating rights. Why are so many smart elected officials ignoring the advice of experts? Is there a strong enough reason for not decarbonizing? In short: no. In long: continue reading.[@SeperatingFamilies]

### The Common Arguments Against Decarbonising

Most arguments against net-zero the focus on the economy, the idea that regulations will hurt the standard of living that fossil fuels gave us. This may have been true in the past but today renewable energy is far cheaper than all fossil fuels, they’re just no longer competitive as countries have continued to grow their economies while reducing their carbon emissions. Another focus is the idea of energy independence so that national security can be guaranteed, but the idea that this requires fossil fuels is short sighted since renewable energy doesn't require fuel imports. When Russia invaded Ukraine, it put an end to Russian gas exports which drove up energy prices hurting livelihoods of millions. Even if a America only uses domestic oil, prices would have still gone up as global demand increased. Fossil fuels are also not required to provide base-load power, instead, investments in batteries or new and safer nuclear technology that uses Thorium or recycled nuclear waste can be used. All the nuclear waste in America if recycled into nuclear fuel could power the country for the next 100 years, more than enough time to develop fusion, new geothermal, or new tidal power that provides a cleaner base-load. Some have moral concerns as much of the renewable technology, particularly solar, is made in China which has a shaky track record with human rights. But how can this argument be made with a straight face if we don't even try to manufacture the technology domestically whilst buying oil from Russia and Qatar. These are some of the most common arguments but they simply don't hold water, so why are they repeated? Since 2010 during the case "Citizens United v. FEC" the supreme court ruled that corporate money spent on political campaigns was protected under the first amendment which opened the gates for unlimited campaign spending. As a result the Trump-Vance campaign took seventy million dollars from the fossil fuel industry. The fossil fuel lobby has infected politics and they're using the money they made polluting the Earth to buy more power. Government is supposed to be about how we create a society that is fair and benefits everyone, but right now selfish policy is being written by rich people to get richer at the expense of everyone, including their children. [@ClimateChangeConsensus]

### The True Concerns of the Clean Energy Revolution

Clearly the above arguments are to protect fossil fuel products and not the people, however, that doesn’t mean there’s nothing to be concerned about with the clean energy revolution. Many who work in the fossil fuel sector will inevitably lose their jobs and it’s hard to be grateful for new clean energy jobs being created across the country when you’ve just been made redundant. There’s a fear of increases in taxes as the historic investment will have to be rapid. Increased regulations necessarily increase the complexity of the production line which can increase costs, and of course, there’s inequality. While the American economy is currently the envy of the world, having plenty doesn't mean everyone gets plenty. America is a paradox of being the world's richest country that still has people who struggle to live. They don’t get paid a living wage as minimum, they have to spend ridiculous proportions of that wage on the same healthcare that rest of the world gets from the state, they don’t get enough time off to deal with problems their low wage and bad healthcare causes, and some remain stuck in poverty because they're unable to buy essentials for a better job like a house or car. Fossil fuels have turned the USA into the wealthiest country in the world. So when you tell the people who are struggling that we’re going leave the rest of the oil in the ground, of course they’re going to fight for their livelihood. This fuels resentment as the politicians who fight for the climate are seen as disregarding the people, green-washing further confirms this belief as companies are seen exploiting the climate crisis. This diminishes public trust in the urgency in the problem and further cements the belief that the clean energy revolution is just another weapon for the rich to become richer at their expense. While the Republicans take donations from the fossil fuel industry, the Democrats aren’t much better and take just as much from the renewable sector. The clean energy revolution will be the greatest investment opportunity humanity has ever seen, it will create huge wealth, but we can’t the people who got rich creating a problem get even richer by selling us the solution. Capitalism is brilliant at motivating an economy into increasing the standard of living, however, uncut and unregulated capitalism does this by having the goal be maximizing short term profits regardless of who is hurt or the effects on the environment. The result is that fossil fuels give \textit{false growth}. [@PoorerWorld]

### Why Fossil Fuels give False Growth

The economy is powered two things: money to create value through goods and services, and people that can create the demand for those goods. People and their wealth are the real engine of the economy, but fossil fuels destroy both in the long term. The WHO estimates 99\% of people live in areas with air pollution that exceeds guidelines, this causes adverse health effects like stroke, heart disease, and lung cancer which decreases quality of life and disposable income. It was found found that not decarbonizing could kill more than 3 million people a year, that’s half the number of people that have ever died from COVID-19 being killed every single year. This along with climate resilience measures is expected shrink the world’s income by 19\% on average by 2050. The USA is expected to have a 10\% decrease in income while poorer countries could have a 30\% decrease in income. Not decarbonizing will tie a permanent sandbag to the world's economy, therefore, growth that can be obtained from fossil fuels now are \textit{false} as they don’t reflect the economic damage fossil fuels have long term. It's much cheaper to quit smoking than to pay for expensive lung cancer treatment, and nobody is calm after the diagnosis just because they can afford the latest chemotherapy. To account for this economic damage the system needs be regulated and redesigned so that it makes economic sense to make the ethical choice in both short term and long term. American regulations in particular can set a strong example because of the power of the USA. When the EU enforced energy efficiency standards on electronics, the rest of the world adopted them too so that they continue trading with the EU. Rather than being dragged down, America would actually be lifting the rest of the world up. And if that's not enough we know regulations won't harm the economy because this idea has already been tested multiple times with the same result.

### Why Poison Needs Regulation

As an example, in the early twentieth century there were no regulations on food, this allowed the food industry to use “unconventional” techniques. Borax, which causes nausea and headaches and is today used as a pesticide was also used as a preservative, Formaldehyde, which is a carcinogen and is used to embalm dead bodies was back then used to preserve fresh meat, and Lead, which causes mental problems and anti-social behavior was used to dye children's sweets red. The food industry had free reign to basically poison its customers with chemicals that were known to be toxic. Many people, including chemist Dr. Harvey Washington Wiley, pressured the government into regulating or banning these chemicals in food, but the food industry lobbied to prevent these laws from passing arguing that it restricted freedom and undermined capitalism. It was only after further pressure and years of study that the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 was passed which created the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) who banned and restricted these additives. This story repeated itself when the automotive industry added Lead to gasoline as an anti-knocking agent despite knowing of it's health effects. Once again there were concerns, lobbying to silence these concerns, followed by regulations, but the damage was already done. As stated earlier there is a causal connection with Lead and antisocial behavior (among many other bad diseases), criminals are far more likely to have higher than average lead toxicity in their blood. What's more If you look at the rates of violent crime you can see that a rise and fall in the twentieth century correlates creepily well with lead toxicity levels of twenty years ago. The kids who where poisoned with lead in their childhood committed more crimes later in life. It was estimated to have cost more than two trillion dollars in lost productivity and caused collectively more than eighty million lost IQ points. How much better off would we be if we didn't have to deal with crowded prisons? How many potential scientists and engineers were lost? We're the generation that was sold out a hundred years ago and we can't do the same to the next generation. Years later, people would think you’re undergoing a stroke if you argued that regulating food additives or leaded petrol hindered capitalism. A hundred years from now people will be just as baffled with what the fossil fuel industry is doing. Air pollution has been linked to stroke, heart disease, and lung cancer; fracking can cause dangerous chemicals like Arsenic, Lead, and Formaldehyde to leak into ground water; and the ash from coal is radioactive and can increase the cancer risk to anyone that lives near an ash pile. The government saved lives when it regulated poison in petrol and food, it’s time the same for the air and water.

### Redesigning Capitalism to do Good

A hedge will grow healthily if left alone, but if left for too long without being trimmed it overgrows and chokes out the rest of the Garden. Pure capitalism is not an optimal way to run a society that benefits everyone, it needs common sense regulation so that it can do good. Do we want to live in a world where it makes economic sense to pollute and make the world worse? Do we want to live in a world where all we care about is getting richer rather than helping those who need it? Do we want to create a legal system that is for the benefit of the rich who can afford to lobby political parties? Do we want to live in a world where resentment and division destroy hope and don’t allow anything to get done? Do we want to live in a world that relies on a product that kills millions? Or are we better than that? Apparently not according to some in congress as climate legislation struggles to pass despite the majority of American being in favor of climate action.

### How to Save the World

Climate science is often disregarded and mocked by Donald Trump, the EPA was even forced to remove the climate change page on their website. Donald Trump claims to love America, but then he does things that are truly unamerican. Both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union also silenced scientists, they suppressed evidence that went against their beliefs while weaponizing evidence that confirmed their beliefs. Darwinism was accepted by the Nazi’s because it provided evidence for their racial superiority. Are we better than this? You can’t believe in democracy only when you agree with the majority, you can’t believe in free-speech only when people who agree with you speak, and you can’t believe in capitalism only when you alone stand to benefit. This is proof enough that Donald Trump is lying when he claims to love America, he only loves himself. To those who deny, silence, and mock climate science whilst blocking legislation from passing: I hope it was worth it. I hope that the extra lining in your pockets was worth selling out future generations. This story looks like it’s not going to happy ending as the rich will continue use their power to get richer by bribing politicians to drag their feet. This causes people to give up hope when discussing the climate as individuals often feel powerless, but you are not powerless. Losing hope is exactly what the fossil fuel industry needs to keep polluting, but we’ve not lost yet. The last decade has shown clear progress on the climate crisis as a projected warming of +4 degrees has been reduced to 2-3 degrees, we need to apply even more pressure to bring it down further to protect future generations, to protect the people alive today who are struggling to get by, and to protect everyone's livelihood. We can create that happy ending if we keep up the fight, and hopefully if we are loud enough, Donald Trump will listen once he's finished and cutting his own taxes, pardoning himself, and separating children from their families.\cite{SeperatingFamilies}

### Sources


